feat(design): CRDs and controllers (#120)
openshift-service-mesh/federation: docs/enhancements/1-crds-and-controllers.md

Reviewer: I think it got lost in translation:

How about a bit more generous prefix for this file, i.e. `0001-crds-and-controllers.md`. This will help to see chronological order of design enhancements  :)

| Status | Authors   | Created    | 
|--------|-----------|------------|
| Review | @jewertow | Jan 2 2025 |

# CRDs and controllers

## Overview

> Currently, we use helm to manage the controller deployment and its configuration. The configuration is passed to the controller as CLI arguments.
> This approach requires restarting the controller on any configuration change and causes pod failures in case of a misconfiguration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, we use Helm to manage the controller deployment and its configuration, which is passed as CLI arguments. This approach offers limited flexibility, as any configuration change requires a controller restart and can lead to pod failures in case of misconfiguration.
```

> Additionally, current approach to resource management is not reliable. We apply resources when it's necessary using the Istio client's `Apply` function,
> so we are not able to reconcile created objects on user's modifications or controller uninstallation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We create required Istio resources only when necessary, driven exclusively by notifications from the FDS client. However, this approach has a drawback - it is not reliable and does not ensure the desired state of the cluster after resources are created. Since there is no ongoing reconciliation, any drift from the intended configuration, whether due to user modifications or controller uninstallation, remains uncorrected.
```

### Goals

> Design CRDs for better user experience and ensure proper resource lifecycle and garbage collection.

Reviewer: I was thinking we can expand the goals based on what has been mentioned in the subsequent sections as well as overview, which is focused on drawbacks of existing approach.

```suggestion
We aim to improve the reliability and flexibility of Service Mesh Federation by:

- Introducing CRDs for a better user experience and declarative resource management.
- Ensuring proper resource lifecycle management.
- Preventing configuration drift by detecting and correcting unintended modifications.
```

### Non-goals

Design CRD for installing federation controller. Federation controller will be still installed with Helm,

> and we are not planning any dedicated operator or integration with Sail Operator for now.

Reviewer: IIUC publishing it as OLM bundle is not on the roadmap at all?

## Design

We need the following CRDs:
1. `MeshFederation` - cluster-scoped resource that includes general federation config, i.e. local settings, remote addresses and identities.
2. `FederationServiceRules` - specifies rules for exporting and importing services; parent for export-related Istio resources, i.e. `Gateway`, `DestinationRule`, etc.; must be created by the mesh admin.
3. `ImportedService` - represents an imported service; parent for import-related Istio resources, i.e. `ServiceEntry`, `WorkloadEntry`, etc.; managed only by the controller; should not be touch by users.

All resources will contain [standard conditions](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#typical-status-properties) in their status.

#### MeshFederation

`MeshFederation` includes settings related only to mesh federation, like remote ingress address, identities, etc.

> This resource must be cluster-scoped, because it will be used as an owner for `ImportedService` resources, which can be created in multiple namespaces.

Reviewer: If that is the only reason to have this resource as cluster-scoped, perhaps we can rethink how we deal with `ImportedService` and their related resources in the context of garbage collection - see https://github.com/openshift-service-mesh/federation/pull/120/files#r1913078586

I would like to move away from thinking about "peers", as this is just an implementation detail.
I also thought that it may be confusing why peer address is used as the address for remote services.

Resource structure:

```yaml
apiGroup: federation.openshift-service-mesh.io/v1alpha1
kind: MeshFederation
metadata:
  name: default
spec:
  local:
    # ID is a unique identifier of the FDS peer, and it's used as a suffix in its Service and ServiceAccount names.

>     id: east

Reviewer: I think we should use `.metadata.name` instead. Then we offload handling the case of rename (remove and recreate child resources) to k8s clean-up instead, because user will deliberately need to first delete the resource and then create under the new name. That would imply that the existing RemoteMeshes are recreated by the user, but I would think of it as analogous case to remove Namespace with Services in it. If you want to rename the ns you do delete/create instead.

Im my opinion we should keep it simple for now and avoid corner cases unless they're really necessary from the UX perspective.

Author: OK

      # is LoadBalancer or NodePort and is directly accessible for remote peers, and then it only creates
      # an auto-passthrough Gateway to expose exported Services.
      # When "openshift-router" is enabled, then the controller creates also OpenShift Routes and applies EnvoyFilters
      # to customize the SNI filter in the auto-passthrough Gateway, because the default SNI DNAT format used by Istio
      # is not supported by OpenShift Router.
      type: istio
      # Optional.
      # Can be empty if ingress.type is openshift-router.
      gateway:
        # Ingress gateway selector specifies to which workloads Gateway configurations will be applied.
        selector:
          app: federation-ingress-gateway
        # Optional.
        port:
          # Optional.
          # Port name of the ingress gateway Service.
          # This is relevant only when the ingressType is openshift-router, but it cannot be empty.
          name: tls-passthrough
          # Optional.
          # Port of the ingress gateway Service.
          number: 15443
    # Optional.
    controlPlane:
      # Optional.
      # Control plane namespace used to create mesh-wide resources.

>       namespace: istio-system

Reviewer: @jewertow If our controller will always be deployed in the same namespace as Istio is, I think we don't need this field at all. We can always get it from pod's env vars.

    identity:
      # Optional.
      # Default value: "federation-discovery-service-<id>".
      serviceAccount: federation-discovery-service-west
      # Optional.
      # Default value: "istio-system".
      namespace: istio-system
      # Optional.
      # Default value: "cluster.local".
      trustDomain: mesh.west
    # Optional
    ingress:
      # Optional
      # Addresses contain a list of IPs or a single hostname used as addresses for imported services when meshes reside in different networks.
      # This field is not required in single network setup.
      addresses:
      - 192.168.1.1
      - 192.168.2.1
      # Optional.
      port: 443
      # Optional.
      # Remote ingress type specifies how to manage client mTLS.
      # Currently, only two types are supported: istio and openshift-router.
      # If "openshift-router" is set the controller applies DestinationRules with SNI compatible with OpenShift Router.
      # If "istio" is set client mTLS settings are not modified.
      type: istio
```

The controller for this resource will be responsible only for updating the mesh configuration in other components,

> like Istio resource factory, FDS clients manager, etc. It will not manage any child resources.

Reviewer: After a second thought I suggest we avoid going too deeply into implementation specifics, such as clients or resource factories. It's sufficient to state:

"This controller is responsible for updating the Federation's internal configuration and does not manage any Custom Resources."

#### FederationServiceRules

`FederationServiceRules` is a namespaced resource for specifying export/import rules.

> This resource is expected to be created as a single instance for all exported services.

Author: 1. We will start with an admission webhook to ensure that we have only one instance.
2. We may consider using labels to associate MeshFederation and FederationServiceRules in the future, e.g. if we will want to support multi-tenant deployments.

      - key: app.kubernetes.io/name
        operator: In
        values:
        - ratings
        - reviews
    # Namespace selectors allows to export all services from namespaces selected by label 
    namespaceSelectors:
    - matchLabels:
        istio-injection: enabled
    # Service list allows to export particular services in particular namespaces formatted as <namespace>/<service>.
    serviceList:
    - "ns-1/ratings"
    - "ns-1/reviews"
    - "ns-2/*"
    # Optional
    # DNS settings allow to customize DNS names for exported services.
    dnsSettings:
      # Optional
      # Search domain is a suffix for the service FQDN
      searchDomain: mesh.global
      # Optional
      # If true, then a service will be exposed as <original-svc-name>.<original-svc-ns>.<search-domain>
      includeNamespace: false
      # Examples:
      # 1. `searchDomain: svc.west.mesh` and `includeNamespace: true` will export ratings and reviews as ratings.bookinfo.svc.west.mesh and reviews.bookinfo.svc.west.mesh
      # 2. `searchDomain: mesh.global` and `includeNamespace: false` will export ratings and reviews as ratings.mesh.global and reviews.mesh.global.
  # Optional

>   # Empty import allows to not subscribe FDS.

Reviewer: We can have a following strategy in place:

- if `import` field does not exist it means we are not subscribing to any other remote
- if it's defined as empty (`{}`) that means we import from **ALL** remotes. That is common way of defining "all" cases, e.g. in `NetworkPolicy` having `podSelector: {}` means apply to all pods. See [`deny-all`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/network-policies/#default-deny-all-ingress-traffic) and [`allow-all`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/network-policies/#allow-all-ingress-traffic) as an example.
- if there are any remotes listed in the import list, only services from those will be imported.

spec:
  # The following list of rules exports services "ratings" and "reviews" from namespace "ns-1" and service "details" from namespace "ns-2".
  export:
    selectors:
    - serviceSelector:
        matchExpressions:
        - key: app.kubernetes.io/name
          operator: In
          values:
          - ratings
          - reviews
      namespaceSelector:
        matchLabels:
          kubernetes.io/metadata.name: ns-1
    - serviceSelector:
        matchLabels:
          app.kubernetes.io/name: details
      namespaceSelector:
        matchLabels:
          kubernetes.io/metadata.name: ns-2
    dnsSettings:
      searchDomain: mesh.global
  # Optional
  # Empty import allows to not subscribe FDS.
  import:
  - meshID: west
    # Optional
    # If no selector is specified, then everything is imported.
    serviceSelectors:
    - matchExpressions:
      - key: app.kubernetes.io/name
        operator: In
        values:
        - ratings
```

Responsibilities of the controller for this resource:
1. Owning resources for exported services:
   * `Gateway`;
   * `ServiceEntry` - if custom search domain configured;
   * `EnvoyFilter` - if the ingress type is "openshift-router".

> 2. Watching services and namespaces and check if they match export rules.

Reviewer: I think we should rephrase it - it's not about checking if they match our rules, but we are watching svc and ns that match defined rules and coordinates exporting between the meshes.

3. Reconciling owned resource if `MeshFederation` was changed.

Example controller:
```go
func (r *FederationServiceRulesReconciler) SetupWithManager(mgr ctrl.Manager) error {
        return ctrl.NewControllerManagedBy(mgr).
                For(&v1alpha1.FederationServiceRules{}).
                Owns(&v1.Gateway{}).
                Owns(&v1.ServiceEntry{}).
                Owns(&v1.EnvoyFilter{}).
                Watches(&corev1.Service{}, WithPredicates(checkIfMatchesExportRules)).
                Watches(&corev1.Namespace{}, WithPredicates(checkIfMatchesExportRules)).
                Watches(&MeshFederation{}).
                Complete(r)
}
```

All export-related resource will include owner reference pointing to `FederationServiceRules`,

> so deleting `FederationServiceRules` will result in removing these resources as well.

Reviewer: I am afraid we are focusing too much on `ownerReference`s on its own, whereas the actual goal is to have a way of properly cleaning up related resources when given CR no longer exists. How it's done will emerge from the implementation.

Example child resource:
```yaml
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: federation-ingress-gateway
  namespace: istio-system
  ownerReferences:
  - apiVersion: federation.openshift-service-mesh.io/v1alpha1
    kind: FederationServiceRules
    name: default
    uid: a8e825b9-911e-40b8-abff-58f37bb3e05d
spec:
  selector:
    app: federation-ingress-gateway
  ...
```

#### ImportedService

`ImportedService` will be created for a group of services from multiple meshes with the same FQDN,
and it will have the following structure:

```yaml
apiGroup: federation.openshift-service-mesh.io/v1alpha1
kind: ImportedService
metadata:
  # Name is a dash-separated FQDN of an imported service
  name: productpage-bookinfo-svc-mesh-global
  # Namespace depends on whether the service exists in the local cluster.
  # If it does not exist locally, it will be root mesh namespace, otherwise it will be the original namespace. 
  namespace: istio-system

>   # Having MeshFederation set as an owner ensures proper resource cleanup after deleting federation.

Author: > Where will the OwnerReference be set?

In ImportedService resources.

> When created by the FDS client? If so, the FDS client will need to get the MeshFederation resource to set the owner reference.

No, the FDS client will trigger reconciler without creating the object in k8s, e.g. send internal structure to the reconciler via a channel.

> I'd presume this would need to be done each time a new ImportedService is created?

Don't reconcilers use cached informers under the hood?

> An alternative to setting an owner could be to add a finalizer to the MeshFederation controller that cleans up all ImportedServices prior to the deletion of the default MeshFederation.

Thanks for this suggestions. I will think it.

  hostname: productpage.bookinfo.svc.mesh.global
  # If a service is federated in more than one mesh, and that service has different ports in meshes,
  # then it will be imported only from the first mesh. 
  ports:
  - name: http
    number: 80
    protocol: HTTP
  # Labels must be the same in all meshes - same as in case of ports.
  labels:
    app: productpage
    security.istio.io/tlsMode: istio
  # List of meshes from which the service is imported.
  # This is required to create correct list of endpoints and identities.
  meshes:
  - west
  - central
```

Responsibility of the controller for this resource:
1. Owning import-related resources: `ServiceEntry` or `WorkloadEntry`, and `DestinationRule`.
2. Restoring the resource state in case of user's modification.
3. Watching services and recreating `ImportedServices` when it's necessary, example:
    * t0: `ImportedService` for `productpage` service was created, and that service does not exist in the local cluster, so `ServiceEntry` in `istio-system` namespace was created.
    * t1: User creates `productpage` service in namespace `bookinfo`.

>     * t2: Controller removes `ImportedService` from `istio-system` namespace with its child resources and creates it again in `bookinfo` namespace with proper child resources.

Reviewer: If we decide not to use `ImportedService` as `ownerRef` of the child resources, we can keep it in the root ns (`istio-system`) and move only dependand resources (i.e. `WorkloadEntry`) to cover this case.

Having all internal resources such as `ImportedService` in a single ns can simplify managing them.

        return ctrl.NewControllerManagedBy(mgr).
                For(&v1alpha1.ImportedService{}).
                Owns(&v1.ServiceEntry{}).
                Owns(&v1.WorkloadEntry{}).
                Owns(&v1.DestinationRule{}).
                Watches(&corev1.Service{}, WithPredicates(checkIfMatchesExportRules)).
                Watches(&v1alpha1.MeshFederation{}).
                Complete(r)
}
```

Example child resource:
```yaml
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1
kind: ServiceEntry
metadata:
  name: import-productpage-bookinfo
  namespace: istio-system
  ownerReferences:
  - apiVersion: federation.openshift-service-mesh.io/v1alpha1
    kind: ImportedService
    name: productpage-bookinfo-svc-mesh-global
    uid: a8e825b9-911e-40b8-abff-58f37bb3e05d
spec:
  hosts:
  - productpage.bookinfo.svc.mesh.global
  ...
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> As the `ImportedService` is fully managed by the controller, the initial reconciliation must be triggered programmatically by the FDS client.
> We should evaluate possible option and choose the best one during the implementation.
> Example options:
> * FDS client can call the controller function directly during processing FDS response.

> > * FDS client can trigger the reconciliation loop sending an imported service via a channel to the controller.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this. Will the initial reconciliation not be triggered when the FDS client creates/applires the `ImportedService`?

#### Egress gateway controller

Egress gateway can be used in routing traffic to imported services, but it cannot be owned by `ImportedService`,
because all imported services will be handled by one `Gateway` and one `VirtualService`, so this is N:1 relation.

> Therefore, resources related to egress gateway will be handled by a dedicated controller, and their owner will be `FederationServiceRules`.

Reviewer 2: Why add an additional controller for egress gateways instead of making this an additional responsibility of the `FederationServiceRules` controller?

Author: Egress gateway and its virtual service are tightly coupled with imported services. `FederationServiceRules` includes selectors for imported services, but it won't be triggered on every service import.

Reviewer: @jewertow It would be good to define a use-case when we need `egress` gateway and what determines its configuration. Having this will help to decide which controller should be responsible for configuring it.

Responsibility of this controller:

> 1. Watching `ImportedService` and reconciling `Gateway` and `VirtualService` if needed.

Reviewer: In other words, what I think would be better to start with is to focus on what we need and why, not only to say which resources we reconcile. I am missing a bigger picture here.
